If you perhaps want to just pop your
video on.
Looks like it's on at my end, so perhaps...
Here we go. Oh, no. It disappeared again.
There we are, hopefully.
Hmm. Hmm. We can't see you, but we can hear you.
We can hear you, Brahman, but we can't see you, so,
if you would like to start. Catherine, I'll just start, and
I greatly appreciate the opportunity to speak.
I'm a professor of political science at UC.
Aside from time in private practice and in broadcasting, I've worked for 30
years at Lincoln University and at Canterbury in environmental policy
and public policy, and I've held fellowships in climate at
the Tyndall Centre in East Anglia,
at the University of Surrey in environmental engineering, at the
University of Oxford in public policy, and served for 10 years on the IPCC,
particularly in cities.
I am really worried about this bill, and
I want to stress four points.
First, I want to make the point clearly that as far as I can
understand, Cabinet was presented with incorrect information in its
budget sensitive planning,
and infrastructure material at point
43. Cabinet was assured that while some
stakeholders might be concerned for the
dilution of environmental protections or hindering
growth,
this merger will improve
delivery of policy and that other countries have successfully integrated
similar policies. I literally can't find any evidence
of other countries that have successfully done this, particularly
such diverse portfolios as housing, urban development,
along with transport, environment, and infrastructure.
The only two that I can find are Kosovo and the
Maldives, and both are struggling.
The countries that we like to compare ourselves to merge
similar functions. So the UK, for instance, merges
environment, food, and rural affairs.
Australia merges agriculture, environment, energy, and water.
Singapore merges sustainability and environment, and Canada,
environment, climate, and nature.
The two countries that have tried to merge housing and urban
issues with environment in this way or tourism as well,
Kosovo and the Maldives, have had huge problems of
conflicts of interest, and I noticed that the Parliamentary
Secretary for Environment will make this point later.
But I would really just like to stress that the argument that was
made to Cabinet that it's difficult to coordinate the
trade-offs currently between these key areas is
actually the fundamental point of Cabinet.
Cities themselves are responsible for about
72% of world emissions.
So I know in New Zealand we talk a lot about agriculture, but it's actually at the
cities level, we can make the biggest differences in trade-offs where we
can really make a significant change at the moment, particularly in areas like
transport.
And it's also
in cities where our three major cities are all struggling at the moment
with key issues of infrastructure around water and sewerage.
Now, it is vital that we have a clear and
transparent process by which the ministers of
environment
and the ministers regarding cities or regarding
climate,
and have those trade-offs made explicit to the public.
For Cabinet to receive papers from a mega ministry where those
decisions have been resolved internally is to reduce the
accountability and the oversight of Cabinet itself.
I don't say this lightly. This is reckless.
My second key point is that going slower will take
us further.
I was witness to the first cross-party
consensus between 1986 and
when the then Simon Upton, Geoffrey Palmer,
ministers and government officials from both National and Labor
worked collaboratively together.
It was a long and involved process, and it went across two elected
governments. But it was a process where everybody was focused
on getting the best out of this for New Zealand, and I really want to
appeal to that spirit again.
Cabinet was urged
and promised that urgency wouldn't be used in the House
to pass this piece of legislation.
Yet I see that yesterday the decision was already
made to appoint a secretary, and it
isn't just a secretary for environment, it's a secretary for environment,
for cities,
and for regional development. Now, that decision's already made, so why
are we even consulting?
Oh, are you there?
Yes, I am. Just pausing because I'm so exasperated.
We were also told that there would be a statutory
office for the Secretary of the Environment.
And
Simon Upton in his PCE role, and I
must admit I, was at least hopeful.
But when we look at the criteria,
the last time we made one of these appointments in 2022, the criteria was
set out for being strategic environmental lead.
And this is so important when environment is fundamental to our
economy, it's fundamental to our major sectors, it's fundamental
to iwi, it's fundamental to future
generations.This time, it appears that
the key priorities for the
secretary are also to be secretary not only for environment,
but now in the new job description, for cities and for
regional
development. This does simply dilute and confuse the role
of the Secretary for Environment.
And finally, the actual legislation itself does not defend the
intrinsic quality and value of ecosystems.
It doesn't defend and protect the quality environment.
It's not clear how the treaty principles will be
upheld,
and it's not clear how the needs of future generations will be protected.
This is rushed and poor legislation, and I'm really
disappointed. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Bronwyn, for your submission.
I'm just going to open it up for some questions.
Rachel Brooking.
A very quick question. Thank you, Bronwyn, for all the work that's gone
into the submission and for alerting us to international
examples. My question is not about the international examples, it's just about that
last point around the intrinsic values of ecosystems
and the future generation point, as well as the treaty point.
Do you
see a way through that could include those
issues in this mega ministry,
and
would your concerns remain if those provisions were put
into legislation somewhere?
The concerns would remain because at the moment we've conflated those
secretarial roles.
The first bit, as proposed, was that there would be a
Secretary of Environment, but we need, as also Simon Upton's
made really clear, we need to make those trade-offs absolutely
clear,
and at the moment it's not. And at the moment, we
are not clear that we will have somebody who will be able to
lead and advance the intrinsic values and the strategy that's
needed for ecosystems, for the quality of environment, and for the
needs of future generations
or treaty principles in that role, while they're also trying to balance
the needs of local government and regional government.
It's a mess,
and there are huge transactional costs for making these kind of
changes. So we also need to know not just what government's going to do, but I
think the public has a right to know what the opposition would do in this situation
as well. This is really important.
These are core to our economy. They are core to the future of the
country, and to make this decision in this rushed
way, to have already made an appointment yesterday, is really
poor governance.
Look, thank you very much, Bronwyn, for your submission and the time
that you've put into that and this morning. So thank you. You have a good day.
Thanks, Catherine, and I hope that you can turn this around, and I really
sincerely mean that, because future generations, and even
our textbooks that we're currently writing for current students, whether they're
blue-greens or red-greens, I don't care, it
really matters for the society and for our future that we get this right.
Thank you, Bronwyn.
So we will now move to our next submitter, who is here with us in person this
morning, the New Zealand Forest Owners Association.
Welcome to the select committee. You have 10 minutes with us, so we will
hand over to you to open up, and then we'll open up for questions.
Thanks, Catherine. Kia ora koutou. Ko Elizabeth Hague toku ingoa.
I'm the CEO of Forest Owners Association, and I'm joined today by
Rachel Miller, who's our environment manager.
Forest Owners Association represents plantation forest growers,
so timber producers in New Zealand.
And our members make up about
1.3 million hectares of the 1.8 million hectares
of New Zealand plantation forest.
I will pass over to Rachel to outline our concerns with the current
proposal.
Okay. Because forestry sits at the intersection of environmental
protection, land use, climate policy, and economic
development, the proposed disestablishment of the Ministry for the Environment
is of key concern to our sector.
We recognize that the government may seek efficiencies through consolidation, and
we acknowledge that merging ministries can reduce administrative
duplication.
However, we have key concerns about the proposal to absorb
MFE into a much larger MCERT ministry.
Our core concern is around the risk that essential environmental
policy functions will be diluted within a ministry that has strong
development, transport, and urban growth mandate.
Our concerns are focused on two key issues,
conflict of functions and secondly, dilution of environmental
capability.
Additionally, while we are reviewing the option for an MCERT,
we would like to highlight the need for some better
cross-agency collaboration through our experiences in the past.
Right, on the first issue,
the Ministry for the Environment's role is deliberately limited to policy,
standards, and advice on the management of natural and physical resources.
Importantly, MFE does not carry out development or delivery
activities.
By contrast, the Ministries of Transport, Housing, and Urban Development are
directly involved in infrastructure development, urban expansion, and
implementation of decisions that can affect land, water, biodiversity, and
emissions. So merging these different roles into a single
ministry creates an inherent risk of conflict of interest.
We are particularly concerned about the proposed amendment to Section 32 of the
Environment Act, requiring the secretary to consider environmental
outcomes only as far as practical
From our perspective, this wording signals that environmental
considerations may become secondary to development priorities
rather than sitting as an independent and authoritative policy voice.
For forestry, it's critical. Environmental rules shape where trees
can grow, how forests are managed, how carbon
sequestration is recognized. Those rules must be
developed free from pressure to prioritize short-term development outcomes.
So our second key concern is on the risk of dilution.
So MFA is relatively small compared to the large operationally
focused agencies
that it's proposed to merge with. There's a real risk that MFA's
specialist expertise in climate policy, environmental monitoring,
and systems
thinking will simply be overwhelmed.
We've seen this before. So the forestry sector has lived through the
dissolution of the NZ Forest Service in 1987, and then
later the merger of the Ministry
of Forestry into MPI in 1998.
Each time, forestry's policy capability became a small part of a
much larger ministry competing for attention and funding.
This has resulted in reduced visibility of
forestry-specific issues, difficulty maintaining specialist
expertise, and environmental considerations being crowded
by higher-profile priorities. We are concerned that the same
pattern could occur here, with environmental policy funding and focus eroding over
time once it is pulled into a broad mega-ministry.
So while we are reviewing the MCERT, we wanted to take the
opportunity to highlight another issue that we have had.
So,
that it relates to cross-agency collaboration between MFA
and the Ministry for Primary Industries.
In forestry, the technical and operational expertise sits within
MPI,
yet MFA remains the ultimate gatekeeper for forestry regulation.
In the past, policy has been developed by MFA without significant
integration of forestry expertise.
The proposal for MCERT is a timely opportunity to strengthen this function.
In closing,
we urge the committee to proceed
with caution. Environmental policy requires independence,
specialist expertise, and a clear mandate.
We believe these qualities are at risk under the proposed merger.
We respectfully recommend retaining a strong standalone environmental policy
function while using the reform process to strengthen collaboration.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak, and we welcome some questions.
Well, thank you for your submission. We'll take the first question from Rachel.
Yeah, thank you. And just going right to the end of your submission there, you're
talking about mechanisms for cross-agency collaboration.
I'm wondering if you want to expand on them,
what you see could work. And also,
the question is, I guess you're referring to MPI as an
example in terms of its relationship with MFA, and that you
can't just add all the
different issues into one giant department.
You've always got to put a line somewhere.
And so it's important that wherever that line is, that those agencies can
still talk to each other, even if there's a line. Is that a fair summary?
Yeah, correct.
Yeah. And so what are some examples, then, for good ways for those
agencies to work together?
Yeah, I think we've had a few examples
over the years where things have worked well, and like
with any policy function, things can kind of wax and wane over
time. So there have been times, like in the development of ETS
policy, where I think we felt like things have worked a bit better.
And certainly through the
reforms in 2018, it felt like there was some good kind
of cross-collaboration and perhaps a little more recognition
given to the importance of forestry.
And then I think over time, those things have
kind of waxed and waned. So in the creation of any ministry, we're just
looking to see more of that,
I guess the separation of functions so that
as folks that are working on the ground, that we can see clearly kind of
who we're working with and how their functions are separated.
So to your point,
particularly for our stakeholders, we need to be able to point to where the
clear, bright lines are around
different functions. But also, I think as agencies
work together, it's really important to us that that operational
understanding can come through into the policy functions.
And I guess this is the key risk that we see with the
amalgamation of the Ministry for the Environment into MCERT,
is that the environmental policy function, as we've
experienced it, does need a grounding and a connection to the operational
function. But I guess the concern is if it's getting more connected into
development than into the primary sector, there's a real risk of urban bias
and a move away from the kind of rural operational input that
we would be seeking from the forestry sector.
Is there anything you want to add to that, Rachel?
Sounds good.
Yep.
Thank you. And we'll take one last question from Lan.
Tena koutou. Thank you for your submission.
I wanted to pick up on your points about conflict
of functions, and you say that there is a risk
of conflict of interest which has not been considered under the bill,
and you're saying that there is a section in the bill that appears to
deal with it as far as practical, but that this might
not actually address that. Do you want to expand on your concerns there?
Well, I think just the phrase "as far as practicable" to us suggests a
prioritization between development and environmental
considerations.
Mm-hmm.
And again, something I guess that
it comes back to this, some people call it the
rural-urban divide, but I think we've got genuine concerns about
how natural infrastructure and built infrastructure
are regarded in terms of development overall.
And I know
Over time, we're going to have to face some conflicts and difficult trade-offs,
particularly with climate change in that space.
But I think out of the gate, to see what looks seemingly in the bill like a
prioritization of development over environment right out of the
gate suggests to us that that's not an equal
trade-off that's being considered, but it's possibly already being prioritized
through the construction of the legislation.
Mm-hmm.
We're concerned that funding for infrastructure will take precedence over funding
for the environment and ecosystem services, et cetera.
Mm-hmm.
And I think there's been a launch at Parliament recently of the natural
infrastructure plan by the Aotearoa Circle.
I just want to point to the fact that in a lot of ways, we're talking about just
different forms of infrastructure here, natural infrastructure and built
infrastructure. And I think over time, we're going to find more and better ways to
integrate those things. But if we kind of prioritize one over the other,
it probably isn't going to help that integration.
Look, thank you very much for your time today.
We have met time, so we appreciate your submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
So we are now just going to skip forward to
EcoSolutions, who I understand are with us
already online.
This is a five-minute one?
Yes.
It
is.
Madam Chair,
Alyssa is also online.
Morena.
All names.
Morena. Good morning.
Welcome to the Select Committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Kia ora. EcoSolutions has received valuable mentoring and capacity
building through the waste minimization funding for projects based in Te
Tai Tokerau.
And I would like to address you in that
capacity. If I had more time, I'd ask you why the government believes
disestablishing the Ministry for Environment is such a good idea.
If the goal was better coordination or efficiency, that can be achieved without
dismantling MFE. Structural reform does not require wiping out an
independent institution. This bill removes government's ability
to ensure environment has an independent system-wide voice
at a time when land, water and climate we all rely on are under increasing
pressure. It weakens environmental governance, undermines the Treaty of Waitangi
obligations and creates legal risk for the Crown.
Second, on the evidence and risk, folding environmental funding functions into
a development-led mega ministry creates clear conflicts of interest, as
has been clearly stated. And international
experience shows that in mega ministries, environmental
outcomes are pushed aside, and when the environmental decisions are legally
flawed, the result is not speed or savings.
It's court cases, delays, uncertainty for councils and developers and higher
costs for taxpayers.
Thirdly, Te Tiriti matters. The Treaty of Waitangi
requires partnership, active protection, and rangatiratanga.
These obligations cannot be simply shifted on paper.
MFE has built relationships and skills that support Maori and
community involvement in environmental decision-making.
And to all Maori, decisions are made for future generations.
Weakening environmental institutions today shifts risk and cost
to our mokopuna. It's not fair, it's not good public finance.
Fourth, accountability. The bill weakens our clear responsibility and
reduces transparency. When accountability is spread thin,
failures are harder to spot and fix.
This increases legal challenges and costs. Why would we choose that?
Finally, there's a better option.
If a mega ministry is needed, why would you choose such odd
bedfellows? A mega
ministry of built environment and infrastructure
ministry, combining the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of
Transport, local government functions of the Department of Internal Affairs,
and the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment, for example,
would combine portfolios that share a common purpose towards
growth, delivery and implementation, allowing clear delivery,
accountability and fewer internal contradictions.
And critically, the environmental regulation remains independent
from development pressures, as in countries like Australia, Canada and
the UK. This protects integrity and trust.
In conclusion, this is not just poor policy.
This is a legal and governance risk.
This also demonstrates a lack of democratic process.
There is no remit to demolish the environmental overview.
Instead, the MFE should be combined with the Ministry of Regulation, for
example, allowing oversight over all policy.
But any move should be more robustly thought out with clear
justifications. Sound decision-making means strong, independent
environmental oversight. Honoring Te Tiriti in
2026 means protecting those institutions, not
dismantling them. For legal certainty, accountability and long-term
resilience, the Ministry for Environment should be retained and strengthened,
not just disestablished. Thank you for your time.
Any questions?
Look, thank you very much, Jo. It doesn't appear we have any
questions, but we have almost met time, so we thank you for your very
passionate submission there this morning.
Mm-hmm.
Appreciate your time.
Thank you.
Thanks. Thank you.
Kia ora.
And keep up your good waste minimization work.
Now we'll move on now to
Alyssa
McElverey Howard, who is also joining
us via Zoom this morning.
Oh, there we go. We can see you there.
Might just need to turn on your microphone, because we can't hear
you
Can you hear me?
There we go. Yes, we can hear and see you.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission.
Okay. Really appreciate this opportunity.
So it's my understanding that the purpose of this
legislation, which removes New Zealand's Ministry of Environment,
placing it on lesser footing within a mega-ministry,
is to streamline economic growth.
Growth within this context does not include investment
in the life-giving environmental resources, but in
enabling investment in technology and infrastructure,
which is costly across the board but rarely lives up
to the hype. My concern is that buried within a melange
of other departments and priorities, protections which
exist to support environmental health and wider living
systems will be eroded by stealth.
If this appears a cynical response, as a scientist and environmental
advocate, I have watched the great promise for a glowing
future made by this coalition, while at the same
time token funding those things on which life
depends, feeding corporate takeovers, whose priority
is to distribute proceeds to shareholders rather than
contributing to and edifying the wider resource
and enabling
unsustainable extraction in food production,
while leaving the environment poorer and many people
struggling to pay for food.
This government has undermined environmental protection in the
following ways: by reversing climate action, emissions
reductions through reinstating of offshore oil
and gas exploration, weakening methane targets,
and the delaying of the inclusion of agricultural emissions.
By passing the fast-track legislation which enables
existing environmental protections to be bypassed
for the financial benefit of a small sector of the economy.
By undermining fresh water protections to give commercial users
priority over ecosystem health, by repealing the clean
car discount, by cutting funding to public transport,
in prioritizing the buildings of roads and motorways, by
cutting funding for climate research, and by removing
sustainability as a core principle.
It's hard from the subset of government actions to have
faith that this new ministry will continue to protect the
environment, which is our fundamental resource.
We have no powerful advocate for the environment within
government coalition, even though all our human
activities are within the context of environment, and
this needs to change. As well as providing the resources on
what life depends, environmental quality is
profoundly grounding for human wellbeing and is an
important component for human mental health.
The expansion of technology and information packaged
to manipulate and grab attention is leading to
a more anxious world, and our respect for the
environment has never been more important. Thank you.
Any questions?
Thank you very much for your submission.
We've got one question from Lan.
Kia ora, Elsa.
Mm-hmm.
Sorry, can you hear me?
I can. Can you-
Oh, lovely. Kia ora. Yeah, thank you so much for your submission this
morning.
We've just heard from-- I'm not sure if you heard the previous submitters,
but they've got real concerns about the sort of
transparency of
basically decisions being made at the ministry level before
advice, for example, even gets to Cabinet.
Do you have any concerns as a citizen about that
transparency aspect?
I think as I've followed actually what's going on, I've really tried to follow it.
What we actually see is we see a profound impact of lobbying,
and I would have personal concerns for this because actually we're
looking at there is
this undermining of
privatization that's going on, and actually, the
problem with this approach is this whole value
to shareholders thing.
And it's not cohesive for
society and it
benefits a few people.
This is like the environment is something that we all own, we all contain,
and everything exists within this.
However, there's a lot of lobbyists to ask for pieces
of the pie,
and what is really concerning is that the talks
about royalties and so on, and the spin to
talk about
limiting our environmental damage,
it's so
without integrity or
we cannot
scientifically prove that. It's just if you say something, if you say it
loud enough, often enough, and if you say it in Parliament, it has more
clout,
apparently.
Thank you very much, Elsa. We have met time.
We appreciate your submission today. So thank you very much.
Good luck to you all, and I really appreciate your
public service. Thank you.
Thank you.
Now we are moving to our next submitter, McGinnis
Institute, who I can see has joined us already.
There we go. Josie, welcome to the select committee this morning.
So you have 10 minutes with us. So we'll hand it over to you for
some opening remarks and then open up for questions
Thank you very much, and thanks all of you. Good morning.
Wendy is sick today, so just I'm stepping in.
And if you have any questions, I'll try to answer, but just bear in mind
that
we might need to come back to you.
So thanks for your patience with that.
I'll keep it quick because you've already heard a lot of good points this morning,
and you'll hear them today.
But as a background, the institute's focus is on designing policy for the
long-term good of New Zealand.
And so there's definitely a need to improve our planning
regime. However, the bill in this current form definitely
has a few issues.
And we're concerned, like many others, that the bill focuses on the
short term, meaning long term and environmental policy will
lose out in favor of short term, more economic
gains.
So as you know, MFA's been in operation since
1986. And it was established for a special
purpose,
and independent ministries really make a difference.
So this bill, we're struggling to understand the rationale for
this mega ministry.
We're concerned that it leads to inconsistency,
uncertainty, and increased costs for public and private
sectors. So people and businesses are struggling to
plan because they don't know what changes are happening, and
there's just a real risk here that the next government
or the one after that will change it back, and that's really difficult
for people to try and make a business or plan their
lives, really.
There's-
Oh, yeah.
It was a sneeze. Don't worry.
Bless you.
So
I guess, yeah, we're lacking evidence on where these mega ministries have
worked internationally, so we'd love to see some analysis
of how this works before we implement it.
Obviously, this bill removes kind of that purpose of
protection for the environment.
It's creating this ministry where someone's trying to balance all these different
purposes. And I think we know what ones will
lose out. It's the ones that are less tangible and longer
term.
The bill also will rely on internal decision-making, which
is likely, as you've heard, to create conflicts of interests,
and lacks public engagement, so more likely that these critical
decisions are made behind closed doors.
And this sort of weakens independent,
transparent oversight for environmental legislation.
So I also want to talk about
the Government Department Strategies Index.
So this is something the institute does
every few years, and we look at government department strategies across
all of government and rank them.
And so in this, looking at this proposed
bill using these government department strategies,
there's a few implications. So one is that the bill will
combine government department strategies from four different sectors.
The other is that the proposal will have significant
implications to the budgeting process.
Groupings of sectors have been used in the past to indicate
how public funds are designated
and sets the scenes for accountability.
So combining these four sectors is quite unusual and a bit
difficult for accountability.
And the second is that this intention will
create a super ministry, possibly with 28 GDSS to
manage,
which is a lot. For context, MB has
16 government department strategies to manage.
So key implications from this work, I can send the Excel sheet
that Wendy's prepared and a bit more detail if you'd
like. But that the first one is that the
proposal will require changes in legislation.
The second is that the opportunities for integration of strategies are
unclear, particularly given the process that already
exists for departments to work together on issues such as climate.
And it's hard to see what strategies would benefit from integration.
So to kind of conclude,
to build the economy and society as a whole,
this conversation is really important.
So we're really grateful that you guys are doing it, thank you, and taking up your
time.
But
a new resource management and planning policy should really focus
on providing three benefits. So the first is
certainty for businesses and citizens.
And everyone,
we've talked to people in the private sector and public, and there's a
lot of uncertainty in the world right now.
And then also uncertainty with what's
happening
which is natural, but if we can provide some certainty in terms of
planning, I think that will really help.
The second is a strategic approach.
So a bit more detailed analysis to
understand how MFA is benefiting or
harming local communities and how public policy around this can
improve outcomes for New Zealanders.
And
the third is trying to develop a nonpartisan
approach. So bringing everyone on the journey together,
even though different goals,
but there are some things we can agree on.
We want our kids to be able to go swimming and fishing.
And so protecting the environment is a really important goal
for New Zealand.And in this context, this
bill doesn't really support that or make
sense. And yeah, I'll finish up
there. You've got a bit of a day ahead of you, so I'm very
grateful and thank you very much.
Thank you, Josie, and thank you for stepping in last minute as well.
Yeah.
We do have a question from Lan.
Tena koe, Josie. Thank you so much for your submission.
I wanted to pick up on your really clear point from the
institute that you say the current system in terms of MFE has
been designed for all New Zealanders current and future, whereas the
new system is designed for a small number of parties focused on
meeting their short-term profits, and that many of those
who actually benefit from this bill are not New Zealand companies or New Zealand
residents. Can you expand about why you've put that point in
there?
Yeah, that's a great question. So I'm not sure if you're
aware, the institute's done a lot of work in aquaculture,
especially in the Marlborough Sounds, with salmon farming in particular.
So I think that's a really good example of that
point, I suppose, where
these companies,
for New Zealand King Salmon, for example, is owned by
Malaysian shareholders, a mix of different shareholders, but
that's one. And so
the bill, how it's changing is sort
of going to benefit these companies who operate in New
Zealand, but actually the benefits at
the end of the day are going
away internationally.
Mm-hmm.
Does that sort of make sense?
Yeah, no, thank you so much for that example. It's really clear.
Yeah. So there's lots of examples, but I think that's a good one.
Thank you, Josie, for your time today.
We have met time, so
yeah, thank you for your submission and for filling in this morning.
Yeah.
Hope your day gets better.
Yes.
Yeah. Thanks for your patience, guys. Have a great day.
Thank you.
Thank you. So we now move on to The Rubbish Trip.
And we have Hannah with us. Welcome to the select committee this
morning. You have five minutes with us, Hannah, so we'll hand it over
to you for your submission.
Kia ora. Kia ora, can you hear me?
Yes.
Okay. Yeah. Tena koutou katoa ko Hannah toku ingoa.
I want to thank the members of the select committee and also the select committee
secretaries and staff for the opportunity to speak today.
So I'm here representing The Rubbish Trip, which is an organization I run with my
partner, Liam Prince. It's dedicated to zero waste and waste minimization
issues, which we advance through education, awareness raising and workshops,
research and advocacy, and peer review, advisory and
consulting services. In the 10 years that we have been
in operation, we have had quite a bit to do with the Ministry for the Environment,
whether directly inputting into policy through advisory groups set up by the
ministry, whether through making submissions on various policy
proposals, being parts of groups that have received grants through
funds such as the Waste Minimization Fund from the ministry, and also through
regularly using the information and resources the ministry puts out,
for example, on its website, amazing waste data that's collected and hosted there.
So, The Rubbish Trip is here to submit
today to oppose this bill in the strongest possible terms, and we
urge the select committee to please recommend that this bill not be passed,
and that the Ministry for the Environment is left out of this mega ministry
merger and retains as an independent voice for the environment.
I also just want to register our extreme dismay, and
how disheartened we are about this bill, as well as the
truncated parliamentary process and this reduced select committee report back
time. I never in my wildest dreams would have imagined that I
would be appearing before a select committee in New Zealand to oppose the
disestablishment of the Ministry for the Environment.
It's truly unbelievable.
So I don't have time to go through much of my submission.
I'm just going to take it as read, and I want to make two high-level points
today. The first point is to say that whether or not you
agree with the government's position that this bill is minor and technical, and I
just want to really emphasize that The Rubbish Trip does not
accept this, and we have set out in detail in our written submission why
we do not think this bill is minor and technical and the impact that it will have.
But regardless, if you accept the bill as minor and technical, one thing you
really cannot accept, and I urge the Environment Select Committee to take note of,
is that this bill will not, and is not intended to,
improve environmental protection and environmental outcomes in New
Zealand.
This is made very clear in the government statements on
this. Furthermore,
the best case scenario is that it will
maintain the status quo. This is just frankly not good
enough. We are, in New Zealand, smashing through environmental limits.
We have rising levels of waste, rising greenhouse gas emissions, declining
air and water quality, biodiversity loss, and so on and so forth.
We should be investing more resources and more priority towards
environmental issues in New Zealand.
None of these issues of environmental degradation are
mentioned at all in the problem definition for this bill in the Cabinet
paper. It is just not the purpose of this bill to improve or do
anything about this situation. So even if you think it's minor and
technical, it maintains the status quo.
That's the best case scenario, not good enough.
The second point I want to make is just in relation to waste, and to say that
waste is already an issue that we have to fight to get
resources, attention, prioritization, and expertise
in the context of a ministry that is dedicated to the environment.
If this bill goes ahead, the environment is going to be
smushed into this mega ministry that has no focus on the environment.
Environment is going to become like waste now, just something that we have to fight
for resources and attention to go towards.
And so then what happens for the subtopics of the environment, such as
waste, or the subtopics of the subtopics, for example, in
waste issues like plastic pollution, organic waste, hazardous waste, and
so on and so forth, all massive issues that are just going to become
footnotes of footnotes, or sort of like a Russian doll situation of
insignificance. It's frightening, and I frankly just feel tired even
thinking about trying to advocate for these issues in the context of the mega
ministry. The last point in relation to waste is just a technical one.
So this bill amends not just the Environment Act, but also the Waste Minimization
Act, which is administered by the Ministry for the Environment.
AndThe way the waste minimisation
currently operates is most of the key decisions that are important for our sector,
such as whether we have product stewardship, what products are regulated, whether
we do anything about organic waste, whether we have a waste levy, where the levy
money goes, all of this stuff is delegated to the Minister for the Environment.
And it's currently very unclear whether we will still have a Minister for the
Environment, who will be the minister administering this act and making these key
decisions. Will environment be their priority, or will they be wearing 1,000 hats
like the secretariat will be?
It's not clear, and this lack of certainty is really problematic for our sector.
It's very unclear what the new operating environment will be for waste
specifically. So we urge the committee to also think about that, that this is going
to have knock-on effects for all these sub-areas
within the environment. So yeah, that's the submission. We oppose the bill.
Thank you for the time today.
Look, thank you very much, Hannah, for that very passionate submission.
Look, we have met time, actually gone over time.
So, yeah, a very well-written submission, so thank you for your
time on that. We appreciate it.
So we now move through to our next submitter, the Canterbury
Regional Council, Environment Canterbury.
There we go. We can see you there, Claire.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so actually five minutes with
us. So, we'll hand it over to you for your submission.
Thank you.
Good morning, everybody, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to
the submission from Canterbury Regional Council this morning.
Look, we recognise that work is underway to establish the new
ministry and particularly acknowledge yesterday's
announcement of the chief executive and secretary for MSEP.
So given this, and at this time, we wish to highlight
matters that need to be considered in the implementation of the new
ministry to protect the Ministry of Environment's dedicated and
independent environmental stewardship role.
Look, significant environmental management reform is being undertaken
across local and central government.
We know that, and it's against the backdrop of major
environmental and climate change impacts.
In recent submissions to government, including the submission before you
today, Canterbury Regional Council has reiterated
that if we are to collectively realise the opportunities of reform and the
outcomes sought, that transition and
implementation must be effectively managed.
And with the scale of and the pace of change and what's at stake,
realistically, we just cannot afford to fail.
So in establishing the new ministry, Canterbury Regional Council
recommends that the implementation arrangements must maintain the objectives of
the Environment Act and provide for,
one, a clear environmental stewardship mandate for the transferred functions,
two, the independence of environmental advice, and three,
the transparent reporting and accountability mechanisms.
And there are a range of mechanisms that could support this, such as
establishing cross-agency groups for environmental management.
Protocols, systems, and appropriate resourcing will also be very
essential.
Clear sequencing, implementation support, and transparent
communication is critical if reform is to deliver
improved outcomes.
Arrangements must be provided for stable transition of institutional
knowledge and systems and service delivery across the environmental
management system at this crucial time of reform.
Very short
presentation. Thank you for your time today, and if there are
any questions, happy to take them.
Yeah, I might jump in with a question, Claire.
In your experience, do you see
duplication at the moment
across agencies, I suppose, when you're having to
get projects off the ground?
I guess possibly from a regional council perspective, not
so much. We
don't really operate so much in the infrastructure
space, but I would suggest that
perhaps our local TAs certainly would find there could be issues
there or other applicants and resource consents, for example.
So yeah. There is obviously some
barriers occasionally, but from a regional council perspective, I think
that
the bulk of our work is in that environmental space, so under the auspice of
the Environmental Act and the MFE.
Yeah. Thank you. And Lan has a question.
Tena koe, Claire. Good to see you this morning.
Good morning.
We've heard really strongly from submitters about the environmental concerns,
and you're certainly echoing them.
But you make it really clear in your submission that you're concerned about the
bill's impact on mana whenua and the Crown's
relationship with its treaty partners.
Can you just give us a flavor of what the concerns are there?
I guess for us in Canterbury particularly, and we aren't the only ones
that have got our Treaty Settlement Act,
so we do have some obligations, particularly
for Ngāi Tahu,
specifically for the regional council.
But we are concerned that other reform and legislation that's
currently going through government does tend to
water down the role of our treaty partners.
So that's basically where we are concerned.
So that's why we would like to see, particularly
in the Environment ActIn
section 17, we've also got that treaty principles
must be taken into consideration, so we really would like to see that transferred
across.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Claire.
We have met time. We appreciate your time today.
So thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay, so we now move on to the Tertiary Education Union, who
are also joining us online this morning.
They are just popping through. There we go.
Davina, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Look, you have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you to talk
us through your submission, and then we'll open for questions.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Davina Hanto.
I'm a researcher at Rangahau Mataranga o Aotearoa, the New Zealand Council for
Education Research. I have a background in ecology science and
education, and on behalf of Te Ākina Te Taiao, the Climate Action Advisory
Group of the Tertiary Education Union, who prepared this submission,
I thank you for this opportunity to talk with you today.
The eight recommendations in our TEU submission are taken as read
but can briefly be summarized into themes for those listening who may be
unfamiliar with it.
Our recommendation one concerns how conflicting objectives of the four
ministries will be approached, how
those conflicting objectives will be approached, and calls for assurance that
environmental considerations will not be subordinated
by this amendment bill. Recommendations two to five seek to
mitigate the loss of specific functions, intent, and
obligations of the Ministry for the Environment under the Environment Act
1986, as although the amendment bill claims that the
Ministry for the Environment existing functions are unchanged, there is clear
potential that these functions will change.
Recommendations six to eight focus on what TEU considers to be
inappropriate process during this consultation, namely a lack of
regulatory impact statement, retracted financial implications,
and insufficient timeframe to request this information that was not supplied
so that submitters could be fully informed of the potential
consequences of this merger.
TEU are very grateful for the
Environment Act 1986 for the establishment and intended
continuity of the Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment.
We appreciate that it is the functions of the Ministry for the Environment
listed in Section 31 of this act, which has enabled Aotearoa New Zealand
for the past 40 years to have a government agency with the responsibility
and the mandate to provide and disseminate
information and services to promote environmental policies,
including environmental education and mechanisms for
promoting effective public participation environmental planning.
It is on environmental education that I am focusing this
part of my talk.
Among the other listed functions of the ministry in the act, these are
crucial roles to ensure that all staff at the Ministry of Education
uphold and support the minister with advice and information and disseminate
this to ensure effective public engagement.
During this time of polycrisis, during which our climate is changing,
biodiversity declining, tipping points are reached, economies collapse,
societies transform, not to mention the impacts of war.
It's all very cheery for a morning talk.
Accurate communication and education to inform public
decision-making around environmental concerns is as important
as ever.
The role of our staff in the tertiary sector
support environmental education through
three components: research, teaching, and community
collaboration.
Last year alone, there were over 385,000 students
enrolled in tertiary education in our country.
Tertiary institutes are a powerhouse of young people reimagining their
collective futures. Tertiary staff, including our
over 12,000 TEU members, have an incredible
impact on training our workforce and serving our communities.
The cutting-edge environmental research from our tertiary sector is made possible
through international collaborations and interdisciplinary networks working to the
benefit of all. This research builds our capability and
capacity to analyze environmental and climate data,
explore response options and mitigation measures, and carry out risk
assessments and inform adaptation planning.
As you can tell, the tertiary sector has a close relationship with the Ministry
for the Environment. Teaching about and for our environment
and for climate change through knowledge-rich and competency-based
curriculum enables students to progress their thinking through all ages,
stages, and disciplines through formal and informal schooling.
The creative and critical thinking skills that students develop pave pathways to
resilience by enabling new knowledge and practices to emerge.
Our most vulnerable communities are already feeling the impacts of climate change,
and a government commitment to environmental education for all will
improve the lives of everyone.
Community service is a cornerstone of the tripartite mission of
tertiary education. Universities, Te Pūkenga and Taiwananga are already
hubs for many provincial and rural communities.
However, there remain significant barriers to Maori participation in tertiary
education, environmental policy participation, and in climate
adaptationThere are opportunities to break down these barriers through
collaborative partnership models between tertiary institutes and communities,
including Iwi and Hapū and Whānau, by all having a key
role in leading environmental education approaches.
Internationally, these environmental education, and more recently climate
education approaches, are identified as social tipping interventions to
transform societies towards collective action that enable
us to maintain our natural and physical resources, maintain and
restore our functional ecosystems.
These are not nice-to-haves, they are fundamentally what all
living things, including us, depend upon for survival.
Similarly, having regard for environmental considerations is not a political
choice. It is an imperative that we adapt our activities
to remain within planetary boundaries and natural resources to sustain our
societies ensure safe climates for future generations.
A quick glance at the World Meteorological Organization state of the global climate
2025, or even just looking at the daily news, gives us a
taste of the scale of the reality of the environmental issues we're
facing. Yet, both formally and informally, education about
these environmental imperatives are often overlooked.
In 1972, the first intergovernmental
conference on environmental education was held in Tbilisi in Georgia.
It was also the year I was born. You would think that a child born at this time had
access to environmental education throughout their schooling, but it wasn't till
1986, with the Environment Act coming into
place. I was 14 years old, and at last New Zealand
acknowledged the importance of environmental education.
But it was not till 1999 that the first guidelines
for environmental education were published in New Zealand,
signed off by Simon Upton, no less than our current Parliamentary Commissioner
for the Environment, who was Minister for the Environment at the time.
I was by then 27, had left the country, having been
educated at university for four years, and returned to
find that
finally, we had environmental education in New Zealand.
From 2015 to 2016, I had the opportunity to
manage the Advancing Environmental Education project that resulted in
a cross-government collaboration of three ministers and ministries,
Minister for the Environment, Minister of Conservation, and the Minister of
Education, to achieve a common goal.
That was to update those 1999 guidelines for environmental
education, and it resulted in the Mataraka
Whakaeka Taiao Te Mahere Raukaka, New
Zealand Environmental Education for Sustainability Strategy for
2017 to 2027. It is still in place,
and it is managed by the Ministry for the Environment.
Three priority areas were identified where government agencies could direct their
efforts over this decade to target opportunities and create momentum to
enable the coordination of environmental education, grow
capability and capacity, and strengthen pathways in sustainable
practice.
The TEU agrees
with
you that the consequences of not adapting well are dire.
The risks are too great for future generations if we don't act now,
and also in merging these four ministries,
we are under great concern that we will
lose all of these functions of the Ministry for the Environment.
What we need is a government that will commit to long-term environmental
considerations by maintaining the integrity of the Ministry for the
Environment, whether it is merged or not,
and have the resourcing to develop the
collaborations and give local agency through community-led
solutions that will endure over generations.
Nga mihi nui kia koutou.
Thank you very much, Davina. Look, we've got time for one question from Rachel
Brooking.
Thank you, Davina. Look, just a quick question on
2.4, your recommendation about conflicts of interest
and how the legislation should say something
about it, and that is so that environmental
functions are not subordinated to the competing priorities of
the consolidated-
Yes
... ministry. Just can you give us an example of how you could
see that identification of conflicts working?
How we could see that working.
Well, it's quite an interesting point that you raise there, Rachel.
So when I mentioned that I'd been involved in
a cross-government
project earlier, it was actually the matter of
ensuring that the integrity of each of those
ministries is maintained, and the concern being that
we have got one Secretary for the Environment who is expected
to balance all four of these ministries'
conflicts. What we would like to know from the TEU
is how the secretary intends to do that, or how the
government intends for a chief executive to be able to
balance all those conflicting requirements.
I don't think that is for me to be able to provide an example, but that is what
we're requesting.
No, okay. Thank you. Useful.
Thank you very much. Look, we have met time.
We appreciate your time this morning, and your submission. So thank you.
Thank you.
So now moving to our next submitter, is Marie Dooley.
She's in the room.
She is. Hi, Marie. How are you?
Thank you.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your
submission. Thank you.
Hopefully what I'm going to say is a little bit more detailed and possibly more
helpful than the submission, because I've had a little bit more time to think about
it. But I've been an official at MFA, and I've also been a long-running, you might
say, critical friend of the Ministry for the Environment.
So I consider myself
able to comment on the gravity of this proposal.
I appreciate that the committee is addressing a legislative sliver of a large
operational change, and it is important to kind of keep those two things in mind.
Nevertheless, it is what makes it possible.
So I think the proposal to push the Ministry for the
Environment into mandatory cohabitation with transport and
housing mandates, and to reassign such a diverse
set of functions to a single person, is actually an inflection point in our
democratic history and our environmental trajectory that is all out of
proportion with the level of analysis and the level of public engagement that has
been undertaken. With my five whole minutes, I have five whole
problems and five partial suggestions for improvement.
The MFA mandate is really broad. I used to lead the waste compliance function, a
tiny little team buried in the bottom of the ministry.
I know what it's like to achieve primacy for sometimes
subordinate mandates, when we're all nationally
unhealthily obsessed with resource management reform.
And I think this will be worse, and it is based on this kind of
woefully narrow view of what the role of the ministry actually is.
I think that's very concerning. The second is that the mandate that exists is
currently expanding. We're facing enormous polycrisis environmental
challenges that are matters of physics, not politics, and a
strong environmental voice at the government table is only going to become more
and more important.
Public policy, many decades, many centuries of public policy, have shown us
that safeguarding public goods require promotion and
primacy to be effective in government.
They very rarely work well in a series of conflicted trade-offs.
That's due to the human tendency to favor short-term decision-making.
Mm-hmm.
And whilst we
enjoy our national pastimes of building housing developments in floodplains
and zombie roading projects, the reality is that what we need to
live is actually clean air and clean water-
Mm-hmm
... and the things that we struggle most to protect.
And I think this will make that worse.
Some might say that there's a natural synthesis with these mandates, that it
actually makes sense for environmental issues and transport issues and housing
issues to be considered together.
I don't disagree that there's a space for that.
But you don't have to dismantle a ministry to get there.
There are plenty of ways to achieve that level of collaboration without
diminishing the environmental mandate.
The reason those mandates are separate is to enable the trade-offs between them to
happen in public view. That's not what's going to happen in a mega
ministry. These discussions will be shaped internally and
by informal norms and conventions that will generally lead to
the quiet death of environmental aspiration,
or perhaps the pursuit of them only when they don't significantly clash with other
imperatives. And my final five whole problem
is that conflicting mandates are fertile ground for regulatory capture, which is an
area where I've done lots of work. Capture occurs where decision-making
continually favors vested interests over the public interest
and patterns that lead over time to the degradation of public goods.
With such conflicting mandates, the potential for undue influence to
quickly diminish the environmental mandate in favor of transport or housing
imperatives is very clear. The development lobby, the transport lobby,
will absolutely secure their interests, and the impetus to moderate those
pressures will be all but absent.
So I have five partial solutions for change.
The first one, the biggest, leave MFA out of the mega ministry.
Maintain them as an independent voice for the environment and government.
Preserve and, in fact, amplify that independence.
If national and international scientific indicators were really
driving decision-making, we couldn't work hard or fast enough to
protect that independence.
Mm-hmm.
Secondly, retain the appropriations, these are the budget envelopes,
under the mega ministry as distinct.
Don't allow them to be collapsed in together.
Enable the integrity that treasury administers those
appropriations to still carry on in full view.
Retain the ability for separate advice to be provided on significant matters,
and for the decisions of what's significant to be subject to transparency and
public review.
Insert environmental mandates into the opposing mandates to soften the
conflict. Make sure that in transport and housing, due
consideration of environmental parameters are mandated and
reported on.
And finally, require regular and public reporting of how those mandates are
reconciled by the poor unfortunate sod that has to somehow
synthesize the whole world across four competing mandates.
I do think this is far beyond an administrative change.
I think this is an inflection point in the protection of Te Taiao, and I
think that far more attention and far more debate is required if
we're to proceed on this ground. So I do encourage the committee to say no.
Thank you, Marie. Look, we've got time for one quick question from Rachel.
Thank you. And thank you for doing that so quickly.
Lots in that.
One of your points was that at the moment, the trade-offs are public and
they won't be public if it's a mega ministry.
Is that because of the link to the minister there
and ministers having disagreements within the cabinet process, et
cetera? Or are you referring to something else?
Well, what I'm saying is when you have an environment mandate and a reporting line
to a minister, you present thatministry's
perspective on an issue, and then the other ministry manages their
perspective, and those trade-offs are actually in full view.
You read the cabinet papers and you read the advice from officials.
I'm not saying it's perfect at BAU, but I'm saying you at least know
what the officials with each mandate actually said.
When you combine and you have hybrid agencies with
multiple conflicting mandates, you don't have that transparency.
There's often a push for an all-of-agency approach.
Mm-hmm.
That's what happened with the all-of-government approach about 10 years ago.
It was like the
public interest mandates just fell off the wagon.
They just don't have the lobbying power behind them.
And I think we just have to talk about physics here, not politics.
It's very clear. We know the state of our environment.
We know what happens. And it's also not an accident.
I'm not suggesting this is a revelation to anybody.
I just think it needs to be on the record.
No, thank you, Marie, and appreciate your submissions and
considerations today. So thank you very much.
You're welcome.
Thanks, Marie.
So we now move to our next submitter, Zero Waste Aotearoa,
who I believe are joining us online.
There we go. So welcome to the Select Committee this morning.
You have five minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission.
Thanks so much for the opportunity to speak with you all this morning.
The 10,000 people working in our organizations, they're putting their hearts and
their souls and their bodies on the line every day to protect and restore our
environment. And at the same time, they're working to build communities and local
economies. We know that development, protection, and restoration can go hand
in hand. We know from experience that it takes tough conversations, clear
thinking, and really strong relationships to find practical pathways to make that
happen. Demolishing our Ministry for the Environment is a radical change of
direction that New Zealanders have not given this government a mandate
for. Zero Waste Aotearoa is 100% opposed to
disestablishing the Ministry for the Environment and bundling it into MCERT,
because all the important conversations will happen behind closed
doors. The relationship between Maori and Te Tai o lies at the
heart of Te Tiriti, and as a Tatanga Te Tiriti organization, we
acknowledge the critical role that MFE plays in
managing the Crown's relationship with iwi and hapū around natural resources and
environmental quality. These relationships have taken decades to
build, and they're going to be buried or lost in the reshuffle if MFE gets
bundled into MCERT. So Hannah Blumhardt's already done a great job of
outlining the impacts on our sector and our Waste Minimization Act.
So I'm going to
focus on the two main models that are being used around the world to
manage the tension between development and protection, and that's checks and
balances or integration.
So a checks and balances model like we've got now gives our environment a seat at
the table, so the issues are clear and transparent, and environmental
considerations are not lost or overridden at the management level.
In this model, political leadership charts the course between competing
objectives. If we think about whether integration's going to work for us,
if we do away with MFE's independent environmental stewardship role and its
cross-system policy leadership, if we weaken scrutiny and we shift weight
to productivity outcomes by bundling MFE into MCERT,
then New Zealand's going to move away from checks and balances towards an
integration model. And integration models need really clear high-level
guidance so that decisions are based on a common set of policy objectives
across all activity. We don't have this kind of guidance in New
Zealand at the moment. Sweden bundled their environmental ministry
in with energy business and industry in 2022.
Two years later, they'd already gone off track, and Sweden's going to fail to
achieve 12 of its 16 environmental quality
objectives. Australia bundled agriculture in with water and
environment in 2020, and bundling protection and
production in together didn't magically align the two separate drivers.
They had all the same problems. They just happened inside one department.
In 2022, they made the strategic shift to set up a Department of
Climate Change, Energy, Environment and Water.
So the Australians have moved from an environmental protection approach to a nature
positive approach. That means not just preventing damage, but
actively repairing and restoring environmental quality.
They're also building a stronger relationship rather than weakening the
relationship with their indigenous people.
They've doubled down instead of giving up on protecting and restoring their
country.
So the RMA reform is creating two separate acts, one for planning and one for
natural environment, so that the trade-offs are clear and transparent.
And we totally agree with the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment that
it makes way more sense for us to keep our Ministry for the Environment and to
resource them properly, so that MFE can focus on providing free and
frank advice and get on with the vital work outlined in the Natural Environment
Bill.
Thank you very much, Sue, for your submission this
morning.
Lan has a question.
Morena. Thank you so much, Sue, for your
submission. I just wanted to pick up on
the opening of your written submission,
where you just talk about the mandate to actually
undertake this quite serious change to,
well, the disestablishment of the ministry.
And you talk about particularly the mandate between
Maori and the Crown and also New Zealanders generally.
Can you
explain to us why you've made that point straight up?
Yeah, I guess I'm old enough to remember when the Ministry for the Environment came
into being. It was put in place to stand as the
guardian of the environment for the New Zealand people, and the
relationship between iwi and Ministry for the
Environment has been a critical factor in making sure that we
do actively work as a country to protect and enhance and
do the practical things that are necessary to look after our rivers, our
oceans, our waterways, our land. To really have the tough
conversations with New Zealanders and speak together about
how we see these things moving forward.
They interact with business, with communities, with Maori.
They're trying to reconcile different points of view and to come up
with common strategies for moving forward.
I see the
Ministry for the Environment is one of the only acts, it may even be the
only act, the only department that has to be
disestablished through an act. And the reason that was put into place in
1987 was because it was considered to be so
important. It's way more important to us than any of the ministries
that were bundled into MBIE or the Ministry for Transport or DIA.
Government can just move those around at will.
But the Ministry for the Environment, there's a specific requirement for it to go
through the parliamentary process.
And what I imagine is that they thought there would be a full and
proper process that it would be gone through if anything was ever going to happen
to it. But instead, what we have is this rush through, stuff it
under a pile of papers and move it through as fast as we can, hope nobody
notices approach, which is just fundamentally inadequate.
Two weeks is just not enough time for New Zealanders
to have a look around. As Marie Doole said, I was listening to her submission
just before, there's no regulatory impact statement.
There's no explanation, there's no discussion.
There's no
paper provided for us to--
I have absolutely no idea how you guys are going to decide about this, because
you've got no information to go on. It's just ridiculous.
And
I would say-
Sue, we'll have to leave it there.
Yeah.
We have met time and, yeah, obviously need to keep
moving. So thank you very much though, for your time and your passionate
submission this morning. We appreciate it.
Yeah, you're welcome.
Kia ora.
Zero waste.
So we now move and